Update timezone docs (#19067)
pingcap/docs: configure-time-zone.md

# Time Zone Support

> The time zone in TiDB is decided by the [`time_zone`](/system-variables.md#time_zone) system variable, which can be set at the session or global level. The default value of `time_zone` is `SYSTEM`. The actual time zone corresponding to `SYSTEM` is configured when the TiDB cluster bootstrap is initialized. The detailed logic is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The time zone in TiDB is decided by the [`time_zone`](/system-variables.md#time_zone) system variable. You can set it at the session or global level. The default value of `time_zone` is `SYSTEM`. The actual time zone corresponding to `SYSTEM` is configured when the TiDB cluster bootstrap is initialized. The detailed logic is as follows:
```

> - TiDB prioritizes the use of the `TZ` environment variable.
> - If the `TZ` environment variable fails, TiDB reads the time zone from the soft link at `/etc/localtime`.
> - If both of the preceding methods fail, TiDB uses `UTC` as the system time zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. TiDB prioritizes the use of the `TZ` environment variable.
2. If the `TZ` environment variable fails, TiDB reads the time zone from the soft link at `/etc/localtime`.
3. If both of the preceding methods fail, TiDB uses `UTC` as the system time zone.
```

## View time zone settings

To view the current values of the global, client-specific, and system time zones, execute the following statement:

```sql
SELECT @@global.time_zone, @@session.time_zone, @@global.system_time_zone;
```

## Set the time zone

In TiDB, the value of the `time_zone` system variable can be set in one of the following formats:

- `SYSTEM` (default value), which indicates that the time zone should be the same as the system time zone.
- A UTC offset, such as `'+10:00'` or `'-6:00'`.
- A named time zone, such as `'Europe/Helsinki'`, `'US/Eastern'`, or `'MET'`.

Depending on your needs, you can set the time zone in TiDB at the global or session level as follows:

- Set the time zone in TiDB at the global level:

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL time_zone = ${time-zone-value};
    ```

    For example, set the global time zone to UTC:

    ```sql
    SET GLOBAL time_zone = 'UTC';
    ```

- Set the time zone in TiDB at the session level:

    ```sql
    SET time_zone = ${time-zone-value};
    ```

    For example, set the time zone of the current session to US/Pacific:

    ```sql
    SET time_zone = 'US/Pacific';
    ```

> ## Functions and data types affected by time zone setting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Functions and data types affected by time zone settings
```

- The value can be given as a string indicating an offset from UTC, such as '+10:00' or '-6:00'.
- The value can be given as a named time zone, such as 'Europe/Helsinki', 'US/Eastern', or 'MET'.

> 

Author: Not sure, I think keeping this might be best.

> 

Reviewer 2: I took a look at the doc again. Yes, I agree, keeping it makes more sense. Btw, the current structure of this doc might be challenging for users. Would it be helpful to introduce the time_zone format first, followed by guidance on using it to set the time zone? If it is OK with you, I’d be glad to submit a commit in this PR for this update.

> 

Author: Yes that sounds good. Please send the commit.

> 

Reviewer 2: Here it is: [`702e7e8` (#19067)](https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/19067/commits/702e7e808f6c11252fabbee3fb55f5d988d978b8). Could you please take a look at it?

> The current session time zone setting affects the display and storage of time values that are zone-sensitive. This includes the values displayed by functions such as [`NOW()`](/functions-and-operators/date-and-time-functions.md) or `CURTIME()`. The `UTC_TIMESTAMP()` function can be used to get a timestamp based on UTC, which can be useful to avoid time zone specific issues. The `CONVERT_TZ()` function can be used to convert between timezones.

Reviewer 3: I would not say that it affects the "storage" of time values, but rather the interpretation and display of TIMESTAMP column type values, as well as some of the mentioned time and date functions. DATETIME/TIME stores the time as given (no conversion) and TIMESTAMP stores the time in UTC (conversion before storing and when retrieving).

>
> - Time zone is involved during the conversion of the value of Timestamp and Datetime, which is handled based on the current `time_zone` of the session.
> - For data migration, you need to pay special attention to the time zone setting of the primary database and the secondary database.
> - To get correct timestamps it is strongly recommended to setup a reliable clock with NTP or PTP. See [system configuration check: NTP](/check-before-deployment.md#check-and-install-the-ntp-service) for how to check this.
> - When using a timezone that observes daylight saving this might lead to ambigious timestamps and/or nonexistent timestamps, especially if calculations are done with the timestamp.

> > - MySQL uses `mysql_tzinfo_to_sql` to convert the timezone database of the OS to tables in the database. This isn't used or needed with TiDB as TiDB relies on timezone data that's part of the Go programming language.

Reviewer 3: Do we need to also say that depending on the environment it will use the time zone info files from the OS, as golang's time package says "use the file <time_zone> in the system timezone directory"?

Author: This is quite a big advantage. Where [`CONVERT_TZ`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.4/en/date-and-time-functions.html#function_convert-tz) in MySQL might return NULL because of missing timezone data that never happens with TiDB.

In addition to this the data in TiDB doesn't need to get updated when the [Olson database](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tz_database) gets updated. Note that MySQL doesn't record a version or timestamp, which makes it impossible to see if the data is outdated and needs to be loaded again. See also https://bugs.mysql.com/bug.php?id=60675

1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

In this example, no matter how you adjust the time zone value, the value of the `DATETIME` data type is not affected. However, the displayed value of the `TIMESTAMP` data type reflects changes in the time zone. In fact, the `TIMESTAMP` value stored in the database remains unchanged, but it is displayed differently according to different time zone settings.

## Important considerations for time zone settings

- Time zone is involved during the conversion of the values of `TIMESTAMP` and `DATETIME`, which is handled based on the `time_zone` of the current session.

> - For data migration, you need to pay special attention to the time zone setting of the primary database and the secondary database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- For data migration, you need to pay special attention to whether the time zone settings of the primary database and the secondary database are consistent.
```

- To get accurate timestamps, it is strongly recommended that you configure a reliable clock using Network Time Protocol (NTP) or Precision Time Protocol (PTP) services. For information about how to check NTP services, see [Check and install the NTP service](/check-before-deployment.md#check-and-install-the-ntp-service).
- Be aware that using time zones that observe daylight saving time can result in ambiguous or nonexistent timestamps, especially when performing calculations with those timestamps.

> - MySQL uses `mysql_tzinfo_to_sql` to convert the time zone database of the operating system into tables in the `mysql` database. In contrast, TiDB directly reads the time zone data files from the time zone database of the operating system, which leverages the built-in time zone handling capabilities of the Go programming language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- MySQL uses [`mysql_tzinfo_to_sql`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.4/en/mysql-tzinfo-to-sql.html) to convert the time zone database of the operating system into tables in the `mysql` database. In contrast, TiDB directly reads the time zone data files from the time zone database of the operating system, which leverages the built-in time zone handling capabilities of the Go programming language.
```
